# How Do You Live?

### (Discover/Find) The meaning of life and a more honest existence in our modern world

<a
href="https://computational-existentialism.github.io/computational-existentialism/book/book.html">Book</a>


## Body and Care

Clones

<a name="213">213)</a> Different objects (subjective abstraction) in the
Care are linked to the self to different degrees.  Communication between
one's finger and one's "self" is fast, while communication with one's car or
another person is limited (and mediated through the senses, but this may not
be relevant).  We could attempt to define the other extreme of this set,
things that are very closely linked to the self.  We name this collection
the **Agent**.

<a name="214">214)</a> The Agent may not contain the whole brain/mind, as
different brain regions may communicate with different effectiveness.  What
is traditionally regarded as the subconscious may not be part of the Agent,
for example, as it is largely inaccessible to it.

<a name="215">215)</a> I wanted to say that people with dissociative
identity disorder, previously known as multiple personality disorder, may
have multiple agents housed in the same body.  Interestingly, there is a
hypothesis that this disorder is induced by therapy.

## Death



<a name="300">300)</a> Entrapment means that the self is limited in space; birth and death mean that it is limited in time.

<a name="301">301)</a> The question was asked why is it that we dread the
non-existence after our deaths but not the non-existence before our births. 
The answer is that seemingly we have information about the world from before
our births, but may be saddened that we won't have information about it
following our deaths.


<a name="304">304)</a> Nevertheless I argue that with our macroscopic bodies
we are essentially locked into a world with a separate, linear time, where
the effects of any uncertainty around time are present, but basically
negligible.  That is, despite <a href="#303">#303</a>, we can regard time as
linear and monotone, and so <a href="#302">#302</a>, and <a
href="#301">#301</a> and <a href="#300">#300</a> hold.

<a name="317">317)</a> In <a href="#305">#305</a> we use "body" in its usual
sense, excluding the rest of our Care.  As such, "body" here is not defined
well.  Perhaps we mean the destruction / change of the Agent (<a
href="#213">#213</a>).

<a name="318">318)</a> Indeed, from <a href="#215">#215</a>, death is more
characterised by the ceasing functioning of an Agent (even if it's not the
only agent in a body).

<a name="319">319)</a> As in <a href="#318">#318</a>, we can talk about
death when the Agent ceases to function, even if much of the body (and
objects included in the Care) survive.

<a name="306">306)</a> From <a href="#305">#305</a> and <a href="#111">#111</a>, the death of the body entails (and is sufficient to cause) the death of the I/self.

<a name="307">307)</a> In quantum mechanics, it is suggested that no (quantum!) information can be lost. It is strange then to find that this is not universal, and it is entirely possible to lose information in death, i.e. the arrangement of atoms/molecules that can provide the functions we associate with life.

<a name="308">308)</a> This is likely because quantum information is high energy: it requires a lot of energy to create or transform a particle, whereas information encoded in macroscopic systems is very low energy. The energy difference (due to different entropies) between a book of random letters and a book containing the text of Hamlet probably exists, but is miniscule compared to energies involved even in everyday chemical processes like burning these books. That is, it is easy to lose this kind of information.

<a name="309">309)</a> Events leading to human deaths are usually low-energy, e.g. chemical processes or physical impacts that can only alter primary or secondary connections between atoms.

<a name="310">310)</a> In this sense, we can regard death as a sufficiently classical (not quantum) process and argue that laws from quantum mechanics (e.g. information preservation) do not apply.

<a href="https://computational-existentialism.github.io/computational-existentialism/blog/what-death.html">Text: What is Death?</a>

<a name="311">311)</a> Despite <a href="#310">#310</a>, I'd need to know more of quantum theory to understand if death as a classical process can also be a quantum state, i.e. if we can expect or hope that a person continues living in a different quantum state that we do not have access to. See <a href="#411">#411</a>. Ideas to explore: - decoherence in macroscopic systems, - losing access to quantum states by entanglement, - whether the universe can hold enough information to keep alternatives of each and every event (it's expanding)

<a name="312">312)</a> Do we need to understand more of our world and quantum mechanics to answer our questions on existence, as in <a href="#311">#311</a>? Or can we build thoughts on existence on a classical physical model as in <a href="#310">#310</a> because our bodies are macroscopic enough for classical physics to describe it well enough for this purpose?

<a name="313">313)</a> Note on <a href="#308">#308</a>: conversation laws appear to have their limits of applicability. Conversation of mass applies until we deal with high enough energies where energy and mass convert to each other. Conversation of atoms apply in chemical processes, but not in nuclear processes. Conversion of protons and neutrons apply in nuclear processes, but not at energy levels where they can separate into quarks.

<a name="314">314)</a> If so, conversation of quantum information may be an approximation as well that is true at the energy levels we can currently consider. So despite <a href="#307">#307</a>, quantum information may ultimately be lost, too. (What does the theory say about the Big Bang? Black holes where this was a central issue?)

<a name="315">315)</a> Of course, quantum and other effects can happen at lower energies as well (tunneling) but are very unlikely.

## Difference and Uniqueness

<a name="400">400)</a> The observations above apply globally; they are objective. They do not describe or explain the subjective experience of being locked into one's body (Entrapment), of being limited in space and time in an apparently random manner, of being **Different** from the external world (as everything else is not me), and of being **Unique** (as there is only one me).

<a name="401">401)</a> Looking at a word of thinking agents from outside, we see that they will all experience Entrapment as long as they are physical systems (see <a href="#111">#111</a>).

<a name="402">402)</a> Despite <a href="#401">#401</a>, nothing explains (or illuminates) why one of these agents is **Selected** to be "I".

<a name="403">403)</a> In <a href="#402">#402</a> we assume that only a single agent is selected -- probably because Entrapment is into a single Body, and because we considered Care to be centered around a single mind/body/agent. These assumptions should be reviewed -- possibly related to surviving death through Care.

<a name="404">404)</a> From the objective observations we predict that whichever agent is Selected, it will have the experience that it has always been selected because it experiences **continuity of self** (Entrapment again) as its memories are encoded in itself (<a href="#108">#108</a>).

<a name="405">405)</a> Even if Selectedness migrates between agents/minds/bodies, no information is carried over from one agent to another; all information (memories) are from the current agent, and so even if this is happening, this process can never be detected. <a href="https://computational-existentialism.github.io/computational-existentialism/blog/soul.html">Text</a> and <a href="https://computational-existentialism.github.io/computational-existentialism/blog/entrapment-soul.html">text</a>

<a name="406">406)</a> The circular nature of Selectedness (it's there but we cannot detect if it changes) may be because it does not exist objectively. It is a subjective phenomenon.

<a name="412">412)</a> Further to <a href="#406">#406</a>, we expect that every physical thinking agent will experience Entrapment, and so (as a consequence) will also experience Selectedness - it will see itself as different and unique. But why?

<a name="414">414)</a> This would mean that the feelings of being different and unique are neither different, nor unique to us.

<a name="407">407)</a> Someone said as soon as we try to look at consciousness (<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EJG1p_JyKsE">mentioned here</a>), it seems to disappear. The same seems to be happening here.

<a name="408">408)</a> We could suppose that Selectedness is an objective property, creating a kind of solipsistic world view.

<a name="409">409)</a> **Uniqueness** from <a href="#400">#400</a>: one may have a sense of uniqueness, but it is not a requirement. If there was an exact copy of me placed in some controlled environment that is identical to mine (so that we would evolve in the same way), my sense of self, dread of death, etc. would not change.

<a name="410">410)</a> Note that the hypothetical copy in <a href="#409">#409</a> is likely impossible even in theory, as the properties of the particles of my body cannot be precisely measured (due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle), and no two environments can be completely equivalent. One could say that the body and its processes are macroscopic and therefore classical enough so that a good enough copy and a good enough replica of my environment can be achieved, see <a href="#312">#312</a>. At the same time, some slight uncertainty creeping into the systems this way could make the responses of the brains of the two copies similar. Let's not forget it's here that Penrose finds free will - ?

<a name="411">411)</a> We need to see if <a href="#409">#409</a> applies to the copy of the self that may be another quantum state of it - see the many world interpretation. Note however that the environments of the two states will be different. See <a href="#311">#311</a>

<a name="413">413)</a> I may be **different** because I have direct access to my own memories, but only indirect access to someone else's memories. This is an approximation.

<a name="415">415)</a> We can imagine a world without us (before we were born; after we die) which raises the question why isn't the world *always* without me. Of course someone needs to pose this very question (I think therefore I am by Descartes).

## Surviving

<a name="500">500)</a> Will lifting things into our care that do not die with our bodies actually make us survive? Removing the focus from the self, focusing on something, especially if it's in our Care, distracts from Entrapment and the Experience. We may call this **Dilution**. However, if death is the cessation of the Agent, it does not make us survive death.

## Attitude to life

<a name="1003">1003)</a> Carnap is right that metaphysics is an expression of an attitude to life rather than verifiable statements or arguments. (The Elimination of Metaphysics... by Rudolf Carnap)

<a name="1004">1004)</a> The previous sections conatin investigations, statements, arguments; this section contains expressions which may be best communicated via some art form.

### The Experience

<a name="1000">1000)</a> We can provide tools / strategies for anyone to have the Experience. It can be a building block to a better attitude to others and life. However, it can also be a lonely and frightening experience (a trial). Maybe do it with support, in a community.

### Others

<a name="1001">1001)</a> We can either deny that other people can have the Experience. We consciously choose the latter. This leads to the recognition that life should be preserved; how important and unique every life (indeed every structure) is.

<a name="1002">1002)</a> Our aim is to build empathy.

## Why-I

<a name="9001">9001)</a> Above we establish that under certain conditions everyone (everything?) has the Experience, that is, they experience Entrapment, etc., and so **once** they find themselves in the special position of being the I, they will continue to do so, or, rather, will have the experience that they have always been so.

<a name="9002">9002)</a> This, however, is not a genetic description; it does not explain why in the current world, I occupy this position, while apparently the world is happy to exist without such a special entity (before I's birth and after its death).

<a name="9003">9003)</a> **Clone argument.** In order to reason about this special position, we imagine a World (W) that consists of Bodies (B_x), and there is a property(?) I() where I(B_x) is true iff B_x contains/implements/is the I. B_x conatins/represents all physical properties of a body, including its memories, experiences and cognitive state. (See above for why these are assumed to be physical.) Assume that I(B_x) and that we create a perfect clone of B_x; let it be B_y, that has the same physical and so cognitive state; assume also that it occupies the same space and so has the same experiences going forward.

Of course it's not possible to scan particles in this manner, and B_x, while being scanned, is also modified. Explore these.

B_x, while being scanned to build B_y, experiences no interruptions in its existence (see above), which means that the mere existence of B_y is not going to make I(B_x) false, and it also won't make I(B_y) true. This means that whether I(B_x) is true or false cannot depend on any information encoded in B_i.

This means that whether I(B_x) is true is external to the information in bodies. It also depends on the World according to an observer, that is, who the observer is.

In other words, the universe one finds themselves in is not just (W), but (W, B_x), that is, the body B_x is also put into a special position. There's nothing wrong with this: W in itself is highly random: why this universe? why now? Adding B_x simply adds extra information that needs to be provided before existence.

That is, X's Universe is U_x = (W, B_x) and Y's Universe is U_y = (W, B_y). We use the same W because we assume the existence of objective reality.

The sleight of hand of science is that it tricks us into thinking that we only look at W, that is, U_x = (W) = U_y.

<a name="9004">9004)</a> My special position is not a property of the world; it is a property of the world-according-to-me.

<a name="9005">9005)</a> I is a consciousness embedded in the world.

<a name="9006">9006)</a> From the point of view of an external consciousness, the world exists, then develops some consciousnesses, which then stop to exist.

<a name="9007">9007)</a> In a sense, we talk about logical statements with a speaker which talk about the world from their point of view. So "b_A: I(b_A)" is true, but "b_B: I(b_A)" is false. Probably thought "I()" is the only expression whose truth value depends on the speaker (assuming a common objective reality).

<a name="9008">9008)</a> The identity of the observer limits the observable part of the universe: which universe (if there are many), the event horizon due to expansion, in time (if that is meaningful), but also in more subtle ways: geography, resources, personal freedoms, etc. So how common is the supposed objective reality between observers?

<a name="9009">9009)</a> Still no notion of how this specialized situation (the I) emerges.

## Day 2

<a name="8000">8000)</a> There is a universe with entities (bodies) in it; each entity can make statements. Entity B_x can say that B_x is "I", that is, "B_x :: I(B_x)" while "B_x :: I(B_y)" would be false wherever x != y. This of course is just equivalent to an identity operation "B_x :: I(B_y) <=> I'(B_x, B_y) <=> B_x = B_y".

<a name="8001">8001)</a> The clone argument says that there is a B_x and its clone B_x2 that consist of the same particles in the same state in the same place and so no statement can be true of one and false of the other. Problem 1: it is of course not possible to have something "else" in the same place. Problem 2: if B_x and B_x2 are indeed so similar, would entity B_x be really able to decide which one it "is", that is, which one is its body? Problem 3: if B_x and B_x2 are so similar, how can we maintain B_x != B_x2?

<a name="8002">8002)</a> Notice that all these problems go away if we have a solipsistic approach. If there is no objectively existing universe that exists before and after the I, if there are no alternative bodies that may just as well be "I" as my body, then there is nothing to explain.

<a name="8003">8003)</a> Maybe what we learn is not which body is us, but what is not us. Step 1: objectively existing things that are outside of my control. Step 2: other bodies and entities that are on the same level as me, and have the same claim to existence as myself. (Indeed realising this is the programme growing out of these explorations.)

<a name="8004">8004)</a> This approach <a href="#8003">#8003</a> may be more compatible with the boundary problem than presupposing existing bodies (that start who-knows-where, end who-knows-where and are separated by who-knows-what) and then choosing one (but what is *one* body?) over the others.

<a name="8005">8005)</a> From <a href="#8004">#8004</a> and <a href="#8001">#8001</a>: we can say that if B_y is preceptably different from B_x that I habitually associate with myself, then I know B_y is not me. This is true of perfect clones placed at a distance.

<a name="8006">8006)</a> It is an important point that one learns to identify with one's body; this is not pre-given.

<a name="8007">8007)</a> However, this identification is predicatable (an observer implemented by a brain will identify with the body it is in) except under very special, contrived circumstances (a brain is systematically led to believe it controls something else. Or just a car?). This again misses the point as to why we get a special brain.

<a name="8008">8008)</a> Objects are (human) constructs. Bodies are human constructs. Self is a human construct. IX is a human construct.

## Day 3

<a name="7000">7000)</a> The body contains the memories. The body contains cognition.

<a name="7001">7001)</a> The brain is physical

<a name="7002">7002)</a> <a href="#7001">#7001</a> -> We experience the world in consistent() time and space steps.

<a name="7003">7003)</a> We remember the same body

<a name="7004">7004)</a> <a href="#7003">#7003</a> -> We experience our body and learn that it belongs to us.

<a name="7005">7005)</a> <a href="#7004">#7004</a>, <a href="#7002">#7002</a> -> Entrapment

<a name="7006">7006)</a> The body / the region of Care / physical identity is fuzzy. In fact, all objects are fuzzy.

<a name="7007">7007)</a> <a href="#7005">#7005</a> -> Any localised brain (with memory) can experience Entrapment. <a href="#7004">#7004</a> and <a href="#7002">#7002</a> are sufficient conditions.

<a name="7011">7011)</a> <a href="#7007">#7007</a> is a **general** statement (no statement on the special status)

<a name="7008">7008)</a> In fact, no (experienced) body is required for Entrapment (that would be through <a href="#7004">#7004</a>), as <a href="#7002">#7002</a> is enough to cause Entrapment.

<a name="7009">7009)</a> Experiences from others (art, communication) overcomes localisation in <a href="#7002">#7002</a>. They **generalise** the self.

<a name="7010">7010)</a> Possible experiment: simulated localised brain that experiences the world locally with small movements in time and space, VS simulated generalised / dislocated brain that can experience the world at any time or place. How do they learn to behave?

<a name="7100">7100)</a> Solipsism here means (a) (time) the World doesn't exist outside the time when I exist; AND (b) (space) my brain is the only brain.

<a name="7101">7101)</a> One brain: <a href="#7100">#7100</a> If so, (space) no other brain is really a brain, so it is necessary the I am the only existing brain / the only brain is the only one that has IX.

<a name="7102">7102)</a> Related terms: consciousness, sapience

<a name="7103">7103)</a> The anthropic principle and related arguments are likely relevant here. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthropic_principle

<a name="7104">7104)</a> If there is one universe: It is unlikely to support life, so why does it? But our existence, however unlikely, is true, it is an assumption/precondition/fact/truth - it doesn't matter how unlikely it is.

<a name="7105">7105)</a> Multiverse / multiple universes: A universe is unlikely to support life, but there are many, so some will.

<a name="7106">7106)</a> <a href="#7105">#7105</a> Does not answer the question why I/we live in this universe.

<a name="7107">7107)</a> I exist (or just think?) (Descartes) -> there must be at least one brain -> this universe must support life.

<a name="7108">7108)</a> The starting point of <a href="#7107">#7107</a> is an inevitable fact/truth. We can only make statements about the current world that are consistent with this.

<a name="7109">7109)</a> Although I can imagine a world in which I don't exist and make statements about it.

<a name="7110">7110)</a> I cannot exprience a world in which I don't exist.

<a name="7111">7111)</a> Negation of solipsism <a href="#7100">#7100</a> is EITHER: (time) the world exists when I do not exist (with or without other brains); OR (space) there are many / other brains.

<a name="7112">7112)</a> <a href="#7111">#7111</a> (time) entails an objective universe / world.

<a name="7113">7113)</a> <a href="#7111">#7111</a> (time): the world exists when I do not exist -> I can not exist -> Why do I exist (now)?

<a name="7114">7114)</a> <a href="#7111">#7111</a> (space): there are many brains -> I could have been another brain -> Why do I have this identity / body?

<a name="7115">7115)</a> <a href="#7105">#7105</a> is an attempt to create a probability for an event (life), and make its occurrence a possibility by positing the existence of many trials (related to the law of large numbers). We can try the same with either <a href="#7113">#7113</a> or <a href="#7114">#7114</a>.

<a name="7116">7116)</a> We know that once I exist as a physical system, I will always feel entrapped into that system. So all we need to ensure is my existence; the rest follows.

<a name="7117">7117)</a> Is my existence an event that occurs?

7200) **If** we can define conscious / sentient / general life, then having life is an objective property of a universe.

7201) #7200 If not, then really the only measure of whether a universe has (conscious/sentient) life is whether I exist in it.

7202) If #7200, we can state whether a universe I do not exist in has (sentient, conscious, intelligent) life or not. If #7201, this is not possible.

## Day 4

7300) How do we determine if I exist in a universe?

7301) Bodies are constructs. Objects are also constructs. How do we determine if a table exists in a universe? E.g. there are structures most observers would say are tables. This can be an objective statement.

7302) In the case of "I", the observer and the observed are the same.

7303) How do we determine if Alice or Bob exists in a universe?

7304) Experiment: does it matter whether receptors are part of the body, or if they are external and see the body in the same way as other bodies?

7305) #7303 We could say that just like with the table, it depends on what other observers say. Not sure if this is satisfactory.

## Day 5

Different universes could be just different places. Although unclear if parallel existence of the same body may only be allowed in different universes.

Bodies are constructs. (Parts in space like cognition, memory, receptors, output, possessions)

Body is defined by a universe, and a series of time-space pairs.

"I exist" is a truism (perhaps tautology?) because I can only make this utterance if I exist. (Descartes, no need for the other half.) What is the "I"?

So, collect where/when the body has self-identified / and when this is stored in its memory. (Memory is physical and local.)

There are no outside brains.

Perhaps: if solipsism is rejected, any statement about the I is true of any other brain. If so, it is never possible to grasp the special status of the I - it is not an objective property of the universe.

Rejecting solipsism (in the sense of equivalence of brains) is asserting that there is no objective I.

Model: bodies are a network of components with printers that output statements.

Simpler model: properly separated agents

## Day 6

There are no external minds. There is no world without "I". If there is a statement, there is an embedded mind. This is the "I".


